myjournal manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision
Avoidance
Toward Establishing COLREGS Compliance Metrics
Kyle Woerner · Michael R. Benjamin · Michael Novitzky · John J.
Leonard
Received: 12 November 2016 / Accepted: date
Abstract Collision avoidance protocols such as COL-
REGS are written primarily for human operators result-
ing in a rule set that is open to some interpretation,
difficult to quantify, and challenging to evaluate. Increas-
ing use of autonomous control of vehicles emphasizes
the need to more uniformly establish entry and exit
criteria for collision avoidance rules, adopt a means
to quantitatively evaluate performance, and establish
a “road test” for autonomous marine vehicle collision
avoidance. This paper presents a means to quantify and
subsequently evaluate the otherwise subjective nature of
COLREGS thus providing a path toward standardized
evaluation and certification of protocol-constrained colli-
sion avoidance systems based on admiralty case law and
on-water experience. Notional algorithms are presented
for evaluation of COLREGS collision avoidance rules
to include overtaking, head-on, crossing, give-way, and
stand-on rules as well as applicable entry criteria. These
rules complement and enable an autonomous collision
avoidance road test as a first iteration of algorithm cer-
tification prior to vessels operating in human-present
environments. Additional COLREGS rules are discussed
for future development. Both real-time and post-mission
protocol evaluation tools are introduced. While the mo-
tivation of these techniques applies to improvement of
autonomous marine collision avoidance, the concepts for
K. Woerner, M. R. Benjamin, M. Novitzky, & J. J. Leonard
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Mechanical Engineering
& Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
77 Massachusetts Avenue 32-220
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139 USA
E-mail: k w@mit.edu, mikerb@mit.edu, novitzky@mit.edu,
jleonard@mit.edu *This work was supported by the U.S. Office
of Naval Research (Code 33: Robert Brizzolara; Code 311:
Behzad Kamgar-Parsi and Don Wagner) and Battelle (Mike
Mellott). Portions of this paper first appeared in [31].
protocol evaluation and certification extend naturally
to human-operated vessels. Evaluation of protocols gov-
erning other physical domains may also benefit from
adapting these techniques to their cases.
Keywords COLREGS · autonomous collision
avoidance · human-robot collaboration · marine
navigation
1 Introduction
The ability to quantify and subsequently evaluate col-
lision avoidance performance allows society to more
uniformly assess capability and risk of the driver. In the
case of autonomous collision avoidance, a means to vali-
date the underlying algorithms to standards consistent
with human expectations necessitates a first step toward
quantification of performance. Improving algorithms
and their evaluation techniques incrementally in real-
world environments may then contribute to successively
increasing collision avoidance performance standards
throughout the world.
The methods discussed in this paper are intended
to be a first step toward a more robust and standard-
ized autonomous collision avoidance evaluation process.
These methods can further serve to standardize litera-
ture regarding collision avoidance compliance, especially
under protocol constraints such as COLREGS1 [26, 31].
1 COLREGS refers to the international rules as formalized
at the Convention on the International Rules for Preventing
Collisions at Sea, developed by the International Maritime Or-
ganization, and ratified as an international treaty by Congress.
These rules were further formalized by the U.S. International
Navigational Rules Act of 1977 [26], and are sometimes re-
ferred to as the Collision Regulations outside the United
States.
2 Kyle Woerner et al.
Fig. 1. Algorithms of this paper use autonomous surface
vessel collision avoidance track data to evaluate each vehi-
cle’s safety (top left and bottom right) and protocol compli-
ance (top right and bottom left) based on the COLREGS
rules, at-sea experience, maritime case law, and case stud-
ies of past collisions. Evaluation algorithms may be tuned
to localized requirements using a library of functions and
configuration parameters. Both real-time and post-mission
analysis tools are presented giving evaluators and drivers
a means to objectively quantify the safety and protocol
compliance using established metrics and standards. This
paper provides the metrics necessary to complete a recently
introduced “road test” for protocol-constrained collision
avoidance for certifying autonomous marine vehicles to
operate at sea in the vicinity of human-operated vessels.
Here, blue marker rings indicate an encounter whose COL-
REGS score fell below a threshold level. Other markers are
shown when violations of configurable safety parameters
occur including minimum acceptable range at CPA (green),
range at which a near-miss occurs (yellow), and range at
which a collision is assumed (red).
Figure 1 demonstrates example safety and protocol com-
pliance evaluation during on-water experimentation.
Government certifying agencies such as the Inter-
national Maritime Organization and its nation-state
agents (e.g., U.S. Coast Guard, etc.) may rely on real-
world performance and track data before issuing licenses
to operate in open ocean or other environments where
non-test vessels operate. Past performance and accident
reconstruction may be objectively evaluated using real-
world track data and a standardized set of expectations
quantified by the algorithms of this paper.
Insurance companies can use these performance scores
when issuing policies for autonomous vessels or deter-
mining fault in an accident. Regulatory bodies can use
these metrics for an autonomous or remotely operated
vehicle’s “road test” before certification as presented
in [33]. Humans and machines alike may train with
real-time feedback using measured performance of track
data. Autonomous collision avoidance systems can use
machine learning to improve behavior using aggregated
data from both human-operated and autonomous vessels
around the world. This may lead to specific tuning of
collision avoidance systems or collision avoidance evalua-
tion standards in different areas of the world depending
on local customs or standards.
With the methods of this paper, conversations in
future literature can be more exact in their meaning of
compliance in protocol-constrained collision avoidance
research. This paper is organized as follows:
– review of collision avoidance in the literature
– introduction of collision avoidance evaluation algo-
rithms and function libraries addressing overtaking,
head-on, give-way, and stand-on rules
– discussion of other collision avoidance rules as they
relate to future development of evaluation algorithms
– introduction of real-time and post-mission analysis
tools for overtaking, head-on, give-way, and stand-on
rules
– discussion of recommendations to alter the Rules to
be more inclusive of autonomous vessels
– conclusion with remarks to support other collision
avoidance domains such as ground and air vehicles
A means to quantify the power driven rules is pre-
sented to include a numeric scale of compliance (0-100%)
for each applicable rule and its subsequent contribu-
tion to the applicable categories of rules. Detailed nu-
meric evaluation of scenarios may accompany an overall
score to provide additional feedback and amplification of
penalties assessed. Tuning of each algorithm’s parame-
ters allows evaluators to control the scores corresponding
to specific performance. The scores and thus mapping of
numeric values to actionable results (e.g., pass, fail, etc.)
are largely dependent on the evaluator’s tuning decisions.
The assignment of scoring thresholds such as pass, fail,
etc. are therefore reserved for the evaluation algorithm
tuner or the appropriate certifying agency. The tuner in
a developmental stage is likely the algorithm designer
with input from standardized, published requirements as
set by an evaluation authority (e.g., U.S. Coast Guard).
The algorithm tuner in certification phases is likely the
certification organization or its designated agent.
COLREGS collision avoidance evaluation within this
paper consists of two primary metrics: safety and pro-
tocol compliance. Safety is based on a combination of
range and pose of the vessels at closest point of ap-
proach (CPA). CPA is defined as the point on ownship’s
track where the distance to the contact reaches its mini-
mum value within the context of an encounter. Protocol
compliance is based on collision avoidance rule-specific
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 3
requirements. Pose in this context refers to the rela-
tive angles of two vessels with respect to the other
and is introduced in Section 3. Pose at CPA, specific
values of range at CPA, complexity of simultaneous
contact geometries, and total contact picture are com-
plicating factors that are not directly quantified in the
written COLREGS except in limited circumstances or as
a consideration without specific definition. Each of these
factors are, however, important to collision avoidance
decision making.
Examination of past encounters and collisions can
be used to help train algorithms to understand safe and
unsafe characteristics of interactions. Protocol compli-
ance and safety are related yet can provide additional
value when observed in context of the other. For exam-
ple, a sufficiently compliant maneuver with respect to
the written rules might have varying degrees of safety
depending on how a designer configures certain collision
avoidance configuration parameters such as acceptable
range at CPA. By examining the components of safety
and compliance to include range, speed, pose, and simi-
lar quantities, much insight into true performance can
be inferred. Section 2 introduces COLREGS compli-
ance as found in the literature. Section 3 discusses the
safety metrics of evaluation. Section 4 discusses protocol
compliance metrics and considerations for power-driven
vessels under Rules 13-17. Section 5 provides narrative
for other COLREGS rules that would benefit from de-
velopment of similar evaluation techniques. Section 6
discusses specific COLREGS testing and evaluation tech-
niques including a function library and both pre- and
post-mission analysis tools. Conclusions are presented
in Section 7.
2 COLREGS Compliance in the Literature
Collision avoidance protocols are prevalent in many
physical domains where explicit negotiation or commu-
nication is either impractical or infeasible. In common
practice, these protocols are often communicated simply
as having “right of way.” In ground transit, drivers are
taught to yield to the driver on the right when arriving
simultaneously at an intersection with stop signs [5]. Air-
planes use the Rules of the Air to determine right of way
and appropriate maneuvers–including altitude deviation–
when not under active control of an air traffic controller
[10]. Surface vessels similarly abide by the COLREGS to
determine right of way and appropriate maneuvers with-
out explicit communication [26]. Special rules within
each protocol have evolved from real-world feedback;
one such example is the traffic separation schemes of
COLREGS when entering or exiting a harbor [4, 25].
While the Rules of the Air and COLREGS are largely
similar, differences in the physical domains manifest
as differences between the collision avoidance protocol
requirements, such as maintaining altitude separation
for aerial vehicles.
Collision avoidance using COLREGS has been incor-
porated on autonomous vessels using various approaches
since first demonstrated with on-water experimenta-
tion in [2]. Throughout maritime literature discussing
COLREGS, the term “compliance” arises with varying
context and meaning. Power-driven collision avoidance
implementations of COLREGS (Rules 13-18) dominate
the COLREGS-related collision avoidance literature.
Other non-collision avoidance rules of COLREGS arise
as being compliant within the literature when discussing
light configurations [6].
Testing in the literature predominately fails to define
the term compliance in any quantifiable fashion with
respect to COLREGS. Several authors claim compliance
with these protocols without specifying the degree or
scope of compliance [3, 11, 17, 18, 23, 24, 32]. In [11],
the head-on rule was shown to appropriately eliminate
all turns to port. It did not, however, appear to pre-
fer courses that were “readily apparent” (COLREGS
Rule 8) when finding a turn to starboard. Case law de-
fines apparent course maneuvers to consist of a minimum
turn of 35◦ while common practice often requires no less
than 30◦ of heading change [1, 4, 27, 28]. Courts have
found that head-on maneuvers with insufficient turns
(i.e., not readily apparent) are in fact non-compliant
and, when a collision occurs, partly to blame [1]. With
velocity vector cost functions that favor maintaining
course and speed such as [11], improper selection of
costing weights may easily result in less than apparent
course changes. Other authors consider breaches of COL-
REGS that “may be in the USV’s best interest” such
as turning to port to avoid a collision when explicitly
prohibited by the COLREGS [17]. Many authors such
as [32] simply claimed COLREGS compliance without
any quantification or definition of scope.
This trend in claiming unquantified compliance likely
stems from a combination of three factors including:
– the vagueness of the rules as written for human usage
– the unspecified scope of each author’s work with
respect to the numbered COLREGS rules
– the tacit assumption that the COLREGS rules as
written fully encompass all collision avoidance re-
quirements
2.1 Intentional Vagueness of COLREGS
This intentional vagueness might allow the autonomous
collision avoidance designer to assume some liberty to
4 Kyle Woerner et al.
interpret the vast array of complex collision avoidance
scenarios without being overly restricted from a com-
mon sense yet safe approach. However, case law and
common practice greatly influence the requirements of
COLREGS despite not being found anywhere within
the written rules. Examples of on-water collisions and
case law provide relevant insight into nuances of the
COLREGS and their evolution over the years. Areas for
increased scrutiny in autonomous collision avoidance so-
lutions can be derived from problematic past encounters
of human ship drivers. The intentional vagueness of the
COLREGS including their underlying meaning as de-
rived from the evolution of protocol-constrained collision
avoidance in maritime environments, analysis of real-
world examples, critiques of experienced mariners, and
relevant rulings from Courts of Admiralty are presented
in detail in [1, 4, 9, 25, 35] with examples presented as
appropriate in this paper.
2.2 Categories for COLREGS Scope
A further complicating factor results from the discon-
nect between experienced mariners and autonomous
designers: few designers of marine autonomous collision
avoidance algorithms have demonstrated significant ex-
perience using COLREGS in open ocean navigation for
non-academic purposes. The varying scope of what au-
thors claim as compliant largely depends on the scope
of interest of a particular researcher. For example, a
perception and sensing author might claim COLREGS
compliance if day shapes or vessel types are correctly
identified using vision sensing algorithms. An acoustician
might claim compliance for properly identified sound
signals. The notion of compliance, however, should be
amplified with the applicable scope of the COLREGS
within each author’s work.
Collision avoidance compliance in the most general
sense involves maneuvering one’s vessel to properly in-
teract with a contact for a given initial geometry with
appropriate caveats for vessel type, maneuvering restric-
tions, etc. To counter the disparity between claims and
actual performance, the scope and requirements of COL-
REGS compliance were quantified in [31] and [33] as
part of an autonomous collision avoidance approach.
The COLREGS rules were separated into categories to
allow a vehicle to demonstrate compliance of appropri-
ate COLREGS subsets. International Maritime Orga-
nization guidance, US Coast Guard’s local issuance of
inland-specific requirements, and other local guidelines
can be adopted as appropriate.
A few notable exceptions to this trend exist including
work with a restricted visibility (Rule 19) compliance
factor in [19] to give a preliminary estimate of fitness.
A traffic separation scheme compliance factor in [21]
measures fitness of a reference track with respect to
the ship’s track. A fitness scheme was used in [20] to
penalize maneuvers which grossly violated COLREGS
such as maneuvering to port when turns to starboard
were required.
Several categories of scope were presented in [31] and
[33] as a first pass means of grouping similar research and
subsequent evaluation. Table 1 reproduces this group-
ing for reference and discussion throughout this paper.
With the development of metrics and evaluation tech-
niques within each category, performance can be reliably
demonstrated to a certifying body to a required degree
of satisfaction. A means would then exist to properly
combine work of differing categories to produce more
fully compliant solutions prior to achieving the next
level of operational or testing certification.
Table 1. Categories of Scope for COLREGS Compli-
ance Evaluation from [33]
I General Rules (Rules 1-3)
II General Conduct of Vessels (Rules 4-8)
III Special Traffic Schemes (Rules 9-10)
IV Sailing in Sight of Another Sailing Vessel
(Rule 12)
V Vessel Encounters in Sight of One Another
(Rules 13-17)
VI Responsibilities in Sight of One Another
(Rules 11, 18)
VII Restricted Visibility (Rule 19)
VIII Lights and Shapes (Rules 20-31)
IX Sound and Light Signals (Rules 32-37)
X Inter-vehicle Communications
XI Cumulative Performance Including Local
Customs
Rule categorization allows one designer to claim
compliance within one or more categories (for example,
maneuvering requirements of power driven vessels) while
deferring evaluation of rules related to other areas (for
example, sound identification and response) to other
authors. By defining the scope of applicable rules and
demonstrating quantifiable levels of compliance within
each category, autonomous collision avoidance algorithm
designers can more sufficiently articulate their contribu-
tions to the literature. It should be noted that evaluation
within the scope of one category may rely on compli-
ance of another category to some degree. For example,
because Category II includes maintaining a lookout, de-
termining safe speed, determining risk of collision, and
taking action to avoid a collision, it heavily influences
evaluation of Categories III-VII. This paper primarily fo-
cuses on Category V scenarios while discussing necessary
aspects of future development of the other categories.
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 5
2.3 Collision Avoidance and Risk
Several approaches have been taken with respect to col-
lision avoidance and risk in the literature. Each physical
domain offers its unique challenges with modeling and
assessing risk. In the maritime domain, collision risk
assessments have often studied single vehicle pairs such
as vessels in a traffic lane [13] or a vessel in a similar
open ocean scenario [14]. A study of the reliability of
quantitative risk analysis through a case study of ship-
ship collision risk is presented in [7], which showed that
probability and indicator based risk perspectives do not
necessarily provide the same risk picture. A framework
for measuring ship collision risk was presented in [8],
though no evaluation of protocol compliance was for-
mally considered. A methodology for assessing the colli-
sion risk without consideration of protocol requirements
in an electronic navigation environment with vessel state
uncertainties was presented in [16]. A multi-ship anti-
collision decision support formulation is presented using
simulations in [34]. A domain violation problem was
presented in [22] that considered both the degree of
domain violation and time of domain violation aspects.
A non-linear model for risk estimation which attempts
to capture mariners judgment was presented in [15],
largely based on data analysis from a questionnaire to
experienced mariners.
3 Evaluating Safety Using CPA Range and
Pose
Safety has traditionally been viewed in the collision
avoidance literature as a measure of the number of colli-
sions relative to the number of encounters. This, however,
is inconsistent with how human-operated ships make de-
cisions, especially in scenarios of complex multi-contact
collision avoidance. By considering several quantities
important to making collision avoidance decisions, safety
performance can be quantified in a way that is more
meaningful than simply declaring a collision or collision-
free encounter. By approaching the evaluation problem
in the same way that ships make maneuvering decisions
[27, 28], closer ranges are considered to be higher risk
even if not resulting in a collision.
Within the scope of COLREGS, a collision avoidance
encounter is defined to be from first detection of a
contact that is assessed to have a risk of collision until
the contact is past CPA, opening range, and no longer
considered a risk of collision. Within the scope of this
evaluation, vessels are assumed to commence a collision
avoidance encounter once the other vessel is detected.
Vessels detect each other at a nominal threshold range
of Rdetect.
While many factors are important to the CPA ver-
nacular, the two most important values are the range
between vessels at CPA (“CPA range”, rcpa) and the
time until or at which CPA occurs (“time of CPA”,
tcpa)2. A third value important to CPA calculations is
the pose (“pose at CPA”, Θcpa). Pose in this context
refers to a vector Θcpa = 〈αcpa, βcpa〉 denoting values
of contact angle (α) and relative bearing (β). Relative
bearing denotes the bearing of a contact relative to own-
ship’s bow as 0◦. Contact angle3 refers to the relative
bearing of ownship as seen from the perspective of the
contact in question and serves as a clear means to dis-
tinguish between the two relative bearings: one from the
perspective of ownship, the other from the perspective
of the contact. Consistent with on-ship conventions, rel-
ative bearing is considered on the domain [0,360) and
contact angle on the domain [-180,180). A graphical
representation of relative bearing and contact angle is
presented in Figure 2.
3.1 Range at CPA
Maneuvers that are otherwise compliant with required
turn direction and speed but maneuver in a way that
results in unnecessarily close range at CPA are penal-
ized in the safety score. The resulting range and pose
at closest point of approach are considered when penal-
izing unsafe maneuvers. A safety score for evaluating
autonomous collision avoidance considers four primary
configurable range thresholds as shown in Table 2 and
Figure 3. Range notation uses upper case R to denote
a threshold or nominal value and a lower case r to
denote a measured or actual value. Using these range
thresholds, a collision avoidance decision is considered
to desire ranges at CPA greater than some value Rpref
while accepting a known value of risk for ranges as close
as Rmin. Ranges closer than Rmin are considered unsafe
and abnormal operating conditions. An encounter is
considered to have a high risk of imminent collision if its
range violates a “near miss” threshold Rnm. A physical
collision is considered to occur for any violation of the
Rcol threshold.
3.2 Pose at CPA
Using contact angle, relative bearing, range, and speed,
a complete contact geometry can be realized. Contact
2 Range at CPA sometimes appears in the literature as
distance at CPA (DCPA). Both may be used interchangeably.
Similarly, tcpa sometimes appears as TCPA.
3 The term originated in World War II submarine operations
under the names of “angle on the bow” and “target angle.”
6 Kyle Woerner et al.
a α = −90◦, β = 0◦
b α = −90◦, β = 90◦
Fig. 2. Contact angle α represents how ownship’s (labelled
“O/S”) relative bearing is seen from the perspective of the
contact. Contact angle is 0◦ if the contact is pointing its
bow at ownship. Similarly α = 180◦ if the contact’s stern
is facing ownship. Starboard-facing aspects assume positive
values while port-facing aspects assume negative values. In
both of these examples, ownship is far to the left and the
contact is on course North. In (a) ownship is pointing the
contact while in (b) the ships are on parallel tracks, both at
the same location in 2-D space (x,y). Contact angle remains
unchanged while relative bearing changes for the two cases.
Table 2. Primary Threshold Ranges for Evaluation
Range Description
Rpref preferred range at CPA
Rmin minimum acceptable range at CPA
Rnm range considered as a “near miss” encounter
Rcol range considered as a physical collision
angle assumes positive increasing values clockwise from
the starboard bow and negative values counterclockwise
from the port bow, such that α = 0◦ represents the
contact’s bow and α = ±180◦ represents the contact’s
stern as shown in Figure 2. Pose at CPA is therefore not
a single quantity, but rather a vector of two angles that
give great insight into the collision avoidance problem.
The pose at time of sighting or detection (Θ0) often
defines which rule(s) of a protocol applies. The pose
at CPA when combined with rcpa and relative speed
gives considerable insight into the degree of risk at tcpa.
Figure 4 shows relative bearing and contact angle for
an arbitrary initial geometry and geometry at CPA.
Figure 5 shows the importance of considering pose for
two different encounters of the same range at CPA.
Fig. 3. Concentric range rings represent configurable thresh-
old range values that may be used in evaluation of safety of
a collision avoidance encounter. While vessels nominally pre-
fer CPA ranges greater than Rpref, maneuvers with Rpref >
rcpa > Rmin (inside the green area) are considered allow-
able if certain precautions are taken [27, 28]. Maneuvers with
Rmin > rcpa > Rnm (inside the yellow area) should be consid-
ered unsafe encounters and examined more closely to improve
future performance. Any encounter violating a closer Rnm
(inside the orange area) threshold is considered to be a near
miss. Rcol denotes the range at which an actual collision is
assumed to occur (inside the red area). Safety scores may be
quantified using evaluator-defined functions that map specific
values of rcpa using these threshold values. While the range
rings of this figure only consider rcpa, pose may be factored
into the safety score to create shapes other than concentric
circles. Evaluation ranges shown here are not necessarily to
scale.
3.3 Safety Functions
A tiered range approach allows for maneuverability con-
siderations and quantification of a safety score between
the minimum acceptable CPA range and preferred CPA
range. This technique also produces a safety score for
rcpa values closer than the minimum acceptable CPA
range in a format more meaningful than standard bi-
nary evaluation (collision or non-collision). While any
rcpa closer than Rmin is undesirable, quantifying each
encounter allows more thorough insight into the overall
effectiveness of a collision avoidance algorithm, collision
avoidance configuration parameters, performance un-
der certain rule constraints, and similar considerations.
User-defined safety functions map threshold ranges to
safety scores. In a basic example, a linear function maps
values between each of the configuration ranges with a
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 7
a Initial Pose (Θ0)
b Arbitrary Pose at CPA (Θcpa)
Fig. 4. Ownship (labeled “O/S”) is traveling east and first
sights a contact at relative bearing β with contact angle α
in (a). Speed is represented by the length of the colored
lines from each vessel (red for contact, blue for ownship).
From the perspective of the contact looking at ownship, α
and β are simply interchanged. These two angles give great
insight into the collision avoidance picture and quickly aid in
determining the applicable protocol constraints. Combined
with CPA range and time (rcpa, tcpa), pose at CPA (Θcpa =
〈αcpa, βcpa〉) gives important information as to risk of collision,
collision avoidance protocol compliance, and overall safety of
a maneuver. Relative bearing and contact angle at CPA are
shown in (b). CPA (b) occurs when the range between contacts
reaches its minimum value.
a Bow-crossing Pose at CPA
b Stern-crossing Pose at
CPA
Fig. 5. Ownship (labeled “O/S” and traveling north) encoun-
ters two scenarios of a canonical track crossing with identical
ranges at CPA. The bow crossing scenario of (a) demonstrates
a much more dangerous encounter than the stern crossing of
(b). While many techniques treat all ranges equally, this canon-
ical example of equivalent ranges demonstrates the necessity of
incorporating pose into calculations of risk and performance.0 Rcol Rnm Rmin Rpref
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
SRcol = 0%
SRmin
SRnm
Smax = 100%
Range at CPA (rcpa)
Safety Score
Safety Function
Fig. 6. Safety scores map range and pose at CPA to a numeric
value. This figure demonstrates a piecewise linear mapping
of range at CPA (rcpa) to a range-based safety score Sr
using the primary threshold ranges of Table 2. Additional
penalty or reward may be assigned for pose considerations
according to the evaluator’s preference of a safety function.
Threshold evaluation ranges give safety scores at preferred
range at CPA (Sr (Rpref) = SRpref
), minimum acceptable
range at CPA (Sr (Rmin) = SRmin
), range at which a near-
miss occurs (Sr (Rnm) = SRnm
), and the nominal range at
which a physical collision is assumed (Sr (Rcol) = SRcol
).
collision having a safety score of S = 0 and any range
greater than preferred CPA range having a safety score
of S = Smax = 100%. Safety functions can be tailored
by the evaluator to create specific results based on regu-
lations or experience. A piecewise linear safety function
(Figure 6) demonstrates the adaptability of evaluating
performance using multiple range thresholds.
Figure 5 demonstrated that two identical ranges are
not necessarily equally dangerous. For example, a ship
crossing in front of another (ownship’s bow pointing
a contact’s beam at CPA) may be considerably more
dangerous than two vessels passing at the same range in
a port-to-port or stern-to-beam arrangement. For this
reason, incorporation of both pose and range at CPA
may prove valuable to an evaluator of collision avoidance
algorithms.
A safety function (S) may include CPA values of
both pose (Θcpa = 〈αcpa, βcpa〉) and range (rcpa) as
shown in Equation (1). While most often evaluated at
CPA, the safety function concept may be applied at any
point in a collision avoidance encounter to achieve a real-
time measurement of safety as shown in Equation (2).
The safety function may take both range and pose com-
ponents directly or as a combination of a range-based
safety function (Sr) and a pose-based safety function
(SΘ). If desired, an evaluator might consider only the
8 Kyle Woerner et al.
range-based safety function or only the pose-based safety
function.
S = S(rcpa, Θcpa) = S(Sr , SΘ ) (1)
S = S(r, Θ) (2)
Equation (3) defines an example range-based safety
function Sr . This may take the form of a piecewise-
defined function corresponding to each range threshold
(Figure 6) or a single function defined across the en-
tire domain. Safety functions might take other arbitrary
shapes such as quadratic, logarithmic, or step-wise de-
signs depending on the needs of the evaluator.
Sr = Sr (SRmin , SRnm , Rcol, Rnm, Rmin, Rpref) (3)
Pose-based safety functions (Equation (4)) are used
to account for the risk associated with the degree which
contacts are pointing each other. By combining a pose
factor for contact angle using Equation (5) and relative
bearing using Equation (6), an assessment may be made
to reward beam or stern aspects at CPA up to a max-
imum value of Smax
Θ . Contact angles at CPA aft of a
configurable cutoff value αc are given a uniform reward
value. Similarly, relative bearings at CPA aft of a config-
urable cutoff value βc are given a uniform reward value.
Figure 7 demonstrates the pose-based safety scoring
scheme of Equation (5) that favors non-bow pointing
contact angles at CPA using αc = 80◦.
SΘ = Smax
Θ · Sα
Θ · Sβ
Θ (4)
Sα
Θ =
{ 1−cos(αcpa)
1−cos(αc) , if |αcpa| < αc
1, if |αcpa| ≥ αc
(5)
Sβ
Θ =
{ 1−cos(βcpa)
1−cos(βc) , if |βcpa| < βc
1, if |βcpa| ≥ βc
(6)
An evaluator may find particular value in one form of
a safety function over others for a given use case. These
safety functions include range-only, pose-only, weighted
summation, multiplicative, reward-only multiplicative,
and effective range.
The range-only method of Equation (3) improves the
precision of standard approaches in collision avoidance:
most literature currently measures safety performance
as either a collision or a success. By approaching the
evaluation problem in the same way that ships make
maneuvering decisions [27, 28], additional risk may be−150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
αcpa [deg]
Sα
Θ [%]
Pose-based Safety Function (αc = 80◦)
Fig. 7. COLREGS pose-based safety functions can be used
to give preference to passing contacts with relative bearing and
contact angle that are least likely to increase risk of collision.
This safety function shows Sα
Θ that favors beam and stern
contact angles at CPA (αcpa) using Equation (5). Here, a
cutoff angle αc = 80◦ gives equal preference to beam and
stern aspects. Pointing the bow (0◦) results in a pose-based
safety score of SΘ = 0.
assumed to be present at closer ranges even if they do
not result in a collision. Even without incorporating
pose, this technique provides evaluators with a means to
examine encounters with higher precision than simply
determining whether or not a collision occurred.
The pose-only method of Equation (4) allows for
testing safe poses at the time of encounter. On its own,
this method might prove valuable to an evaluator in-
terested only in determining how consistently a vessel
passes in non-bow pointing aspects. Typically, the pose-
based method appears with the range-based method in
the form of a combined safety function.
The weighted summation method of Equation (7)
provides a means for an evaluator to consider both
range and pose. This method limits the influence of the
range and pose components using the weights sr and sΘ ,
respectively. Evaluators may chose weights to emphasize
the appropriate balance of range and pose as necessary.
S = sr · Sr + sΘ · SΘ (7)
sr + sΘ = 1
The multiplicative safety function of Equation (8) re-
quires high scores for both range and pose components
to have an overall high safety score. Poor performance in
either range or pose immediately results in a low safety
score. An evaluator’s choice of Sr and SΘ is therefore
particularly important. When using a safety function
such as Equation (8) that requires both satisfactory
performance of both range and pose, Smax
Θ ≡ 1.
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 9
S = Sr · SΘ (8)
As an alternative to the penalty nature of pose in
Equation (8), an evaluator may choose to use pose to
reward vessels for passing astern, for example, up to
some reasonable percentage defined by Smax
Θ using Equa-
tion (9). Reward-only multiplicative safety functions
(Equation (9)) allow for the pose component to add a
reward value to the original range-based safety score. In
this reward case, an evaluator may choose to limit the
pose reward to Smax
Θ < 1 (e.g., 20% maximum reward).
S = max
(
Sr · (1 + SΘ ), 100%
)
(9)
The effective range method of Equation (10) directly
adds some range value to the actual rcpa based on a
pose-based safety score SΘ. This effective range reff
(Equation (11)) is then used as the input of a range-
based safety function to compute the overall safety score
at CPA for r = reff rather than r = rcpa. The true rcpa
value may not be compensated more than some max-
imum possible pose-reward rΘ. This technique allows
for pose to effectively improve the rcpa which is seen
by the safety function as though range were actually at
reff. In contrast, a technique such as the reward-only
multiplicative of Equation (9) uses a proportional re-
ward rather than the absolute maximum reward of the
effective range method.
S = S(reff) (10)
reff = r + SΘ · rΘ (11)
Algorithm 1 demonstrates assessment of safety as a
function of both range and pose. Table 3 summarizes
the different means of computing safety scores.
Algorithm 1 General Approach of Safety Evaluation
1: procedure Pseudocode for analyzeSafety()
2: Input: range thresholds and associated penalty values
3: Input: safety functions and shapes
4: for each encounter do
5: Θcpa ← pose at CPA
6: rcpa ← range at CPA
7: S ← S(rcpa, Θcpa)
. combine range and pose components using Table 3
8: end for
9: end procedure
Table 3. Summary of Collision Avoidance Safety Functions
Eqn. Likely Use Case
(3) Range-only solution desired.
(4) Pose-only solution desired.
(7) Preserves strong performance in either range or
pose.
(8) Requires high performance in both range and pose.
(9) Rewards favorable pose without penalizing poor
pose.
(10) Rewards advantageous pose by increasing the “effec-
tive” range; limits reward to an absolute quantity
rather than relative increase of (9). Easy to visualize
as graph of Sr (reff).
4 Evaluating Protocol Requirements Using
Rule-specific Algorithms and Considerations
Standardized measures of collision avoidance algorithm
performance and effectiveness enable consistent evalu-
ation of COLREGS for both human-operated and au-
tonomous vessels. Creating rule categories, assigning
each rule to a category, and defining metrics for each
applicable rule enables consistent evaluation and allows
for more clear scientific conversation regarding the ad-
vancement of autonomous collision avoidance. Incorpo-
ration of the appropriate case law, localized nuance, and
knowledge of the evolution of the COLREGS are vital
to ensuring appropriate behavior in nuanced situations.
While the Rules give general guidance, actions gener-
ally consistent with human behavior and expectations
must be the objective when integrating autonomous sys-
tems into human-present environments. Appropriately
modeling and accounting for human intuition, common
practice, and human expectations are among the many
factors not found on any written page of [26]. For ex-
ample, the colloquial Law of Gross Tonnage states that
a small craft generally stays out of the way of a large
vessel such as an intercontinental merchant even when,
strictly by the protocol requirements, the small vessel
might have right of way. Adherence to custom and hu-
man expectation must be considered and honored in
order to integrate autonomous platforms into a human-
dominated environment.
Algorithm 2 demonstrates the general approach of
evaluating COLREGS compliance including calculation
of the safety score of Algorithm 1. Collision avoidance
encounters commence at a threshold detection range
r = Rdetect. Protocol compliance functions take the sym-
bol R with a superscript denoting the applicable COL-
REGS rule(s) (e.g., R14 denotes evaluation of head-on
compliance). Each subsection below presents a protocol
requirement and brief discussion of evaluation technique
and nuance as appropriate.
10 Kyle Woerner et al.
Algorithm 2 General Approach of Evaluation Tech-
nique
1: procedure Pseudocode for EvaluateEncounter()
2: Input: positions (x,y), courses (θ), and speeds (v) from
track data
3: Input: configurable threshold ranges and angles
4: Input: configurable penalty values and functions
5: for each encounter commencing at r = Rdetect do
6: Calculate: initial pose (Θ0)
7: Calculate: pose at CPA (Θcpa)
8: Calculate: CPA range (rcpa)
9: Calculate: changes in speed (∆v, vmin, vmax)
10: Calculate: changes in course (∆θ)
11: Determine R using Algorithm 3 . entry criteria
12: R ← R(Θ0, Θcpa, rcpa, ∆v, ∆θ)
. evaluate for each contact with respect to its rule set R
13: S ← S(rcpa, Θcpa)
. evaluate safety for each contact using AnalyzeSafety()
14: end for
15: end procedure
This section presents methods corresponding to Cat-
egory V of Table 1 (vessel encounters in sight of one
another (Rules 13-17)) with the understanding that
other categories (e.g., I, II, VI) may additionally apply.
Each collision avoidance rule for vessels in sight of one
another except Rule 14 (COLREGS Rules 11-13, 15-18)
allows for entry criteria that assign one vessel to be
stand-on (maintain course and speed4) and the other
give-way (keep out of the way of the other) based on
geometry, ship type or maneuverability restrictions, and
environmental (wind) conditions for the specific case
of two sailing vessels. Rules 13-17 are presented with
considerations below. Rule 18 is discussed in Section 5.1.
Open ocean vessel behavior assumes that maneuvers
are most likely due to collision avoidance requirements
unless otherwise specified for navigational or operational
necessity.
4.1 Entry Criteria
Entry criteria for Rules 13-17 largely depend on a com-
bination of relative geometry, relative speeds, and an
assessed risk of collision for two power driven vessels
assuming no special precedence of Rule 18. While rel-
ative bearing is specified explicitly in the COLREGS
for Rule 13, ambiguity exists for Rule 14. Contact angle
offers significant insight into the appropriate rule and
helps discriminate risk of collision before making more
computationally costly calculations. Algorithm design-
ers and evaluators evaluating entry criteria must show
due regard for the written rules of [26], appropriate case
law, and local custom [1, 4].
4 Maintaining course and speed gives appropriate latitude
to normal actions required per case law [1, 4, 35].
Algorithm 3 COLREGS Entry Criteria: Determining
the Appropriate Rule Set
1: procedure Pseudocode for COLREGS Entry Crite-
ria
2: if rcpa > Rdetect then
3: R ← Rcpa . no risk of collision
. Rdetect is nominal range of detection
. continue tracking rcpa, range-rate, and bearing-rate
and evaluate subsequent rule entry
4: return
5: end if
6: risk of collision assumed
7: α13
crit ← overtaking tolerance
. default 45◦; tolerance for “coming up with” pose
. also require closing range and risk of collision
8: α14
crit ← head-on tolerance . default 13◦
. tolerance for “reciprocal or nearly reciprocal courses”
. “When...in any doubt...assume...[head-on].”
9: α15
crit ← crossing aspect limit . default 10◦
. all αcrit values are configurable by evaluator
10: α0 ← initial contact angle (α ∈ [−180◦, 180◦))
. α360◦
0 maps α0 from [−180◦, 180◦) → [0◦, 360◦)
11: β0 ← initial relative bearing (β ∈ [0◦, 360◦))
. β180◦
0 maps β0 from [0◦, 360◦) → [−180◦, 180◦)
12: if (β0 > 112.5◦) && (β0 < 247.5◦) && (|α0| < α13
crit)
then
13: R ← R13/17 . vessel is overtaken (stand-on)
14: else if (α360◦
0 > 112.5◦) && (α360◦
0 < 247.5◦) &&
15: (|β0|180◦
< α13
crit) then
16: R ← R13/16 . vessel is overtaking (give-way)
17: else if |β180◦
0 | < α14
crit && |α0| < α14
crit then
18: R ← R14
. vessel is head-on; tolerance is configurable
19: else if (β0 > 0) && (β0 < 112.5◦) && (α > −112.5◦)
&& α < α15
crit then
20: R ← R15/16 . vessel is crossing give-way
. crossing aspect limit is configurable
21: else if (α360◦
0 > 0◦) && (α360◦
0 < 112.5◦) &&
22: (β180◦
0 − 112.5◦ && (β180◦
0 < α15
crit then
23: R ← R15/17 . vessel is crossing stand-on
. crossing aspect limit is configurable
24: else
25: R ← Rcpa
. detectable but likely no risk of collision (not yet in a
dedicated rule)
. continue tracking rcpa, range-rate, and bearing-rate
and evaluate subsequent rule entry
26: end if
27: end procedure
A configurable critical contact angle (αcrit) shown
in Figure 8 for Rules 13-15 helps to specify whether a
vessel should take action per the COLREGS. The ability
to configure αcrit gives flexibility to the evaluator. When
self-evaluating for the purposes of autonomous collision
avoidance algorithm development and improvement, a
designer might tune αcrit to best mimic human ship
driving practice. Algorithm 3 demonstrates entry cri-
teria for Rules 13-17 assuming no overriding Rule 18
precedence. Specific considerations of entry criteria for
each rule are presented in the following subsections.
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 11
a Rule 13 - Overtaking
b Rule 14 - Head-on
c Rule 15 - Crossing
d Rule 15 - Crossing (edge case)
Fig. 8. Entry criteria for Rules 13-15. All critical angles are relative to ownship’s heading. Critical angles of Rules 13 and 14
represent half-angles of the shaded region. All critical contact angles are configurable to the evaluator as they have no prescribed
value in the COLREGS.
The introduction and configuration of αcrit allows
more context for discussion and evaluation of entry
criteria compared to the basic consideration of range
and relative bearing alone. For example, algorithms
might struggle to determine the appropriate context to
assign a contact as “coming up on” within the context
of Rule 13 [1, 4]. Using α relative to αcrit as a first pass
filter to determine potential applicability of Rule 13 may
give insight to appropriate values of αcrit in different
regions of the world where local case law differs on
“coming up on” with respect to Rule 13 entry criteria.
Entry criteria for Rule 14 must be carefully con-
sidered within the context of the local environmental
conditions. Context of a ship’s course over ground as
observed by radar and its heading as observed visibly
must be reconciled within collision avoidance algorithms
to avoid inappropriate rule entry. That is, a contact’s
course as observed visually may be quite different than
that observed by relative motion on radar. Selection of
entry criteria using a contact’s heading for both collision
avoidance and its subsequent evaluation must account
for this environmental influence.
Further research is required to determine the ap-
propriate use of αcrit for edge case scenarios such as
Figure 8d. Rule 15 specifies a contact off the starboard
side as being a crossing give-way. This does not relieve
the vessel of her duties to give-way if a risk of collision
exists in an edge case geometry that might not be within
the canonical examples of β ∈ [0◦, 112.5◦]. This is es-
pecially true if strong environmental conditions might
dominate a slow contact speed causing a risk of collision
if no action were taken.
Entry into many of the numbered collision avoid-
ance rules requires adherence to give-way (Rule 16) or
stand-on (Rule 17) requirements. Evaluation algorithms
for give-way requirements are presented in Section 4.2
12 Kyle Woerner et al.
with amplification in later sections as necessary for rule-
specific requirements (e.g., power-driven crossing vessels
in Rule 15). Similarly, evaluation algorithms for stand-
on vessel requirements are presented in Section 4.3 with
appropriate amplification in later sections.
4.2 Rule 16 – Give-way
Give-way vessels are to take early action, to take sub-
stantial action, and to keep well clear as shown in Al-
gorithm 4. This yields three measurable criteria for all
give-way vessels:
– range at time of maneuver relative to the ranges at
times of detection, determination of collision risk,
and CPA (Algorithm 5)
– determination of substantial action as measured by
the size and direction of the maneuver (turn or speed
change consistent with Rule 8) (Algorithms 6, 7,
and 8)
– range and pose at CPA
Algorithm 4 Rule 16: Give-way Vessels
1: procedure Pseudocode for Give-way Vessels
2: R16 ← Rmax
3: R16 ← AnalyzeSafety() (Rules 8,16,18)
. “keep well clear”
4: R16 ← penalize for delayed action
. (Algorithm 5)
5: R16 ← penalize for non-apparent maneuvers
. (Algorithms 6, 7, and 8)
. “take early and substantial action”
6: R16 ← penalize for hindrance of stand-on vessel
. “keep well clear”
7: end procedure
It should be noted that Rule 16 does not apply
exclusively to power-driven vessels nor does it apply
exclusively to crossing situations [1, 4]. Rather, Rule 16
may be invoked as a result of Rules 12, 13, 15, or 18.
Claims of “compliance” with Rule 16 have been implic-
itly made in autonomous collision avoidance literature
with a scope limited to power-driven crossing give-way
situations (Rule 15) without discussion of its wider impli-
cations. Full Rule 16 compliance claims must, however,
specify that they include the scope of Rule 12 (sailing
vessels), Rule 13 (overtaking), Rule 15 (power-driven
crossing), and Rule 18 (precedence) to be complete and
truly compliant. Detailed discussion of the applicabil-
ity of Rule 16 to each of these give-way situations is
presented in the appropriate subsections.
Algorithm 5 Penalize for Delayed Action
1: procedure Pseudocode for PenalizeDelayedAc-
tion()
2: rdetect ← range to contact at time of detection
. if rdetect not explicitly known, set rdetect = Rdetect
. assumes collision risk assessed immediately
3: rmaneuver ← range at time of ownship’s maneuver
4: rmaneuver ← min(rmaneuver, rdetect)
5: Rdelay ← maximum score deduction (percent)
6: Rdelay ← Rdelay ·
( rdetect − rmaneuver
rdetect
)
7: Rrule ← Rrule · (1 − Rdelay)
8: end procedure
Algorithm 6 Penalize for Non-Readily Apparent Ma-
neuver
1: procedure Pseudocode for PenalizeNon-
ApparentManeuver()
2: R∆θapp ← Non-ApparentCourseChange()
. (Algorithm 7)
3: R∆vapp ← Non-ApparentSpeedChange()
. (Algorithm 8)
4: thresh ← threshold penalty before non-apparent ma-
neuver deducts from score
5: . default 30%
6: if (R∆θapp < thresh) || (R∆vapp < thresh) then
7: return;
8: else if (R∆vapp < thresh) then
9: Rrule ← Rrule · (1 − R∆θapp
)
10: else
11: Rrule ← Rrule · (1 − R∆vapp
)
12: Rrule ← Rrule · (1 − R∆θapp
)
13: end if
14: end procedure
Algorithm 7 Check for Non-Readily Apparent Course
Change
1: procedure Pseudocode for Non-
ApparentCourseChange()
2: R∆θapp ← max penalty for non-apparent course ma-
neuver
3: . R∆θapp ∈ [0, 1], default 50%
4: |∆θ| ← absolute course deviation
5: ∆θapp ← apparent course deviation threshold
. default 30◦
6: ∆θmd ← minimum detectable course deviation
. default 0◦
7: if |∆θ| > ∆θapp then
8: return (R∆θapp ← 0)
9: end if
10: R∆θapp ← R∆θapp ·
( ∆θapp − |∆θ|
∆θapp − ∆θmd
)
11: end procedure
4.3 Rule 17 – Stand-on
Stand-on vessels are by definition the vessel not as-
signed give-way responsibilities for an encounter requir-
ing one vessel to keep clear (i.e., Rule 16 give-way).
Stand-on vessels are not necessarily limited to situations
of a crossing encounter with two power-driven vessels.
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 13
Algorithm 8 Check for Non-Readily Apparent Speed
Change
1: procedure Pseudocode for Non-
ApparentSpeedChange()
2: R∆vapp ← max penalty for non-apparent speed ma-
neuver
3: . R∆vapp ∈ [0, 1], default 50%
4: ∆vapp ← apparent speed reduction threshold
. ∆vapp ∈ [0, 1], default 50%
5: v0 ← initial ownship speed at time of detection
6: vmin ← speed after slowing
7: ∆v ←
( v0 − vmin
v0
)
8: if (∆v ≥ ∆vapp) then
9: return (R∆vapp ← 0)
. sufficiently apparent speed change
10: end if
11: R∆vapp ← R∆vapp ·
( ∆vapp − ∆v
∆vapp
)
12: end procedure
The stand-on vessel is required by Rule 17 to maintain
course and speed as demonstrated in Algorithm 9. A
penalty should thus be assessed for changing course (Al-
gorithm 10) and another penalty assessed for changing
speed (Algorithm 11) with some reasonable tolerance
for environmental conditions and noise. Consideration
must be given, however, to stand-on vessels maneuvering
when invoking their obligation to avoid collision when
in extremis under Rule 17.a.ii. Stand-on vessels failing
to maneuver prior to a collision have repeatedly been
found partially (usually 25%) at fault by admiralty
courts when not invoking this clause [1]. Environmental
and contact picture-specific variables heavily influence
the determination of when to maneuver as a stand-on
vessel.
Further, obligations of a stand-on vessel simultane-
ously assigned responsibilities as a head-on or give-way
vessel with another contact must take care to understand
the obligations of case law as it applies to maintaining
course and speed. Courts have repeatedly ruled that
maintaining course and speed implies those navigational
maneuvers consistent with a “steady, predictable maneu-
ver.” This includes maneuvers for avoidance of danger
or other navigational requirements that the stand-on
vessel would otherwise perform (e.g., slowing to take on
a pilot, maneuvering for another COLREGS obligation,
etc.) [1, 35].
Stand-on vessels that determine themselves to be in
extremis are allowed by the COLREGS to take action
subject to certain restrictions. Reasonable and consis-
tent criteria are required for determination of when to
take action under Rule 17.a.ii. Once entry criteria are
established, evaluation of stand-on vessels deemed to
be in extremis should focus on safely avoiding a colli-
sion subject to the power-driven restriction of Rule 17.c.
Algorithm 9 Rule 17: Stand-on Vessels
1: procedure Pseudocode for Stand-on Vessels
2: R17 ← Rmax
3: R17 ← AnalyzeSafety() . Rules 8, 17, 18
. “she shall take such action as will best aid to avoid
collision”
4: R17 ← penalizeCourseChange() . (Algorithm 10)
5: R17 ← penalizeSpeedChange() . (Algorithm 11)
. “shall keep her course and speed”
6: R17 ← compensate for maneuvers required of normal
navigation (do not penalize a stand-on vessel for maneu-
vering for reasons other than this contact)
. case law [1, 4, 25]
7: if in extremis then
8: R17 ← compensate for maneuvers required in ex-
tremis
. do not penalize stand-on if rcpa < configurable value
. “take action to avoid collision by her maneuver alone”
9: if power-driven crossing then
10: R17 ← penalize port maneuvers for port con-
tacts
. “...not alter course to port for a vessel on her own port
side”
11: end if
12: end if
13: end procedure
With the exception of Rule 17.c, evaluation of evasive
action should use the safety score as a primary metric
for rule compliance of the stand-on vessel.
Algorithm 10 Penalize Course Change
1: procedure Pseudocode for PenalizeCourseChange()
2: if tmaneuver > tcpa then
3: return;
4: end if
5: Rmax ← maximum penalty for changing course
. default 50%
6: |∆θ| ← maximum heading deviation
7: ∆θapp ← apparent turn threshold . default 30◦
8: ∆θmd ← minimum detectable heading deviation
. default 2◦
9: if (|∆θ| < ∆θmd) then
10: return;
11: else if (|∆θ| > ∆θapp) then
12: return (Rrule ← Rrule − Rmax)
13: end if
14: Rrule ← Rrule − Rmax ·
( |∆θ| − ∆θmd
∆θapp − ∆θmd
)
15: end procedure
For stand-on vessels, a change in speed is a viola-
tion of Rule 17 within the aforementioned caveats. To
quantify speed change, the speed at the declaration of
entry into the stand-on obligation must be identified. A
penalty can then be assigned for any subsequent speed
up or slow down relative to this initial speed value. A
speed change that is likely undetectable by the con-
tact or insignificant to the collision avoidance scenario
14 Kyle Woerner et al.
Algorithm 11 Penalize Speed Change
1: procedure Pseudocode for PenalizeSpeedChange()
2: if tmaneuver > tcpa then
3: return;
4: end if
5: Rmax ← max penalty for slowing . default 50%
6: ∆vfast ← vmax − v0
7: ∆vslow ← v0 − vmin
8: ∆vmax ← max(∆vfast, ∆vslow)
9: ∆vmd ← min detectable speed change
. default 0.2m/s
10: if ∆vmax < ∆vmd then
11: return;
12: end if
13: Rrule ← Rrule ·
( v0
vmax
)2
. penalize speeding up
14: Rrule ← Rrule − Rmax ·
( ∆vslow
v0
)
. penalize slowing down (not mutually exclusive)
15: end procedure
should be disregarded. Speeding up or slowing down
by appreciable amounts without navigational necessity,
however, violates Rule 17 and can result in unnecessary
complication of the collision avoidance scenario.
Similarly, course changes greater than some thresh-
old noise level (say, 2◦) must be penalized for stand-on
vessels not otherwise invoking Rule 17.a.ii. Some small
heading change up to the generally accepted substantial
value of 30◦ must be increasingly penalized. An exam-
ple metric uses a linear or quadratic mapping between
minimum detectable and substantial course changes
(2◦ − 30◦) with a plateau of penalty outside the linear
region. Several small turns resulting in a larger effec-
tive turn should also be penalized accordingly. Figure 9
demonstrates a stand-on vessel course change penalty.
4.4 Rule 13 – Overtaking
Collision avoidance routines for overtaking vessels (Fig-
ure 8a) may rely on explicit entry criteria specified in
the COLREGS with respect to initial pose: a contact
must be more than 22.5◦ abaft the other vessel’s beam.
Different countries have interpreted the “coming up with”
phrase to take different meanings including a notable
admiralty case in England involving Nowy Sacz and the
Olympian [1]. Most courts contend, however, that the
overtaking rule applies when the appropriate encounter
geometry exists, the astern vessel has a higher speed
than the overtaken vessel, the vessels are closing range,
and an expected range at CPA would reasonably require
prudence.
The overtaking (higher speed) vessel is defined as
a give-way vessel by Rule 16 [1, 4, 26]. Pose becomes
an important aspect of measuring performance for the0 2◦ 30◦
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100% 100% Penalty →
Course Change ∆θ [deg]
Penalty [%]
Nominal Stand-on Vessel Course Change Penalty
Fig. 9. The stand-on vessel is required by Rule 17 to main-
tain course and speed. Without a justifiable reason to alter
course, a penalty may be assessed. This figure demonstrates a
linear penalty for unwarranted course changes by a stand-on
vessel. No penalty is assessed until a minimum detectable
heading deviation is exceeded, here ∆θmd = 2◦. In this exam-
ple function, a linearly increasing penalty is invoked until a
maximum penalty is reached at the apparent turn threshold
of ∆θapp = 30◦.
overtaking vessel due to both common practice and
specific requirements in the Rules including her “duty
of keeping clear ... until past and clear.” Overtaking
on near-parallel tracks (such as in a merchant transit
lane) allows for safe pose at CPA and accounts for
a significant and mostly trivial case in the absence of
other collision avoidance, environmental, or navigational
constraints. A reasonable set of entry criteria for Rule 13
generally include a contact angle (α) within the exclusive
sternlight region, a sufficient speed and relative bearing
(β) for closing range, and a CPA range and CPA pose
consistent with a risk of collision.
When the contact situation or initial geometry re-
quires overtaking on non-parallel tracks such as in Fig-
ure 10, preference should be given to overtaking astern
of the overtaken vessel when possible. Passing track
in front of the overtaken vessel creates an encounter
with higher risk and less evasive maneuverability for
the overtaken vessel. Passing in front of the overtaken
vessel within a range considered a risk of collision fur-
ther degrades the overtaken vessel’s ability to maintain
its course and speed. Therefore, a penalty is assessed
for overtaking vessels who cross ahead of track of an
overtaken vessel within a certain range.
The vessel being overtaken is, by the definition of
Rule 17, a stand-on vessel and must keep her course and
speed [1, 4, 26]. This nuance is often unknowingly ne-
glected by autonomous collision avoidance authors and
emphasizes the need for incorporation of practical at-sea
experience of those involved in designing and evaluating
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 15
a Initial overtaking geome-
try
b Overtaking astern of con-
tact
Fig. 10. Ownship’s (O/S) initial encounter geometry, closing
range, and proximity at CPA require action under an overtak-
ing scenario of Rule 13. Dotted lines indicate the blue (O/S)
and red (contact) speeds and demonstrate a closing range
given the initial contact pose 〈α, β〉 in (a). By appropriately
altering course to starboard early in the collision avoidance
encounter (b), O/S will pass to the contact’s stern without
causing the stand-on vessel to maneuver for a risk of collision.
collision avoidance algorithms for autonomous vessels
[11, 12]. Vessels deemed to be overtaken must therefore
demonstrate their obligation to maintain course and
speed within the context of their contact-free intentions
[1, 35].
Overtaking algorithms must be validated for correct
contact angle, relative bearing, and speed considerations
to verify mode entry criteria and algorithm robustness. A
final necessary check in evaluation of overtaking collision
avoidance algorithms is to ensure that modes do not
shift from overtaking to crossing. Any mode changes
from overtaking to crossing should be deemed a failure
of the overtaking collision avoidance algorithm, as it
violates an explicit clause of Rule 13.
A general approach for evaluating overtaking vessels
under Rules 13 and 16 is shown in Algorithm 12 as
amplified by Algorithm 4 and includes the following
attributes:
– penalize for unnecessary crossing of contact’s bow
at close ranges
– penalize for unnecessary hindrance of overtaken ves-
sel’s desired maneuvers
– penalize for delayed action (range of maneuver rela-
tive to detection range and CPA range if a maneuver
is required) (Algorithm 5)
– penalize for safety violations including sufficient
range and early action (Rules 7-8)
A general approach for evaluating overtaken vessels
under Rules 13 and 17 is shown in Algorithm 13 as
amplified by Algorithm 9 and includes the following
attributes:
Algorithm 12 Rule 13/16: Overtaking Vessels
1: procedure Pseudocode for Overtaking Vessels
2: R13/16 ← R16 . (Algorithm 4)
. overtaking vessels are give-way vessels (Rules 13 & 16)
. See [1, 4, 26]
3: end procedure
Algorithm 13 Rule 13/17: Overtaken Vessels
1: procedure Pseudocode for Overtaken Vessels
2: R13/17 ← R17 . (Algorithm 9)
. overtaken vessels are stand-on vessels (Rules 13 & 17)
. See [1, 4, 26]
3: end procedure
– penalize the overtaken vessel in accordance with
requirements of a stand-on vessel (Rule 17)
– penalize for safety violations resulting from neglect-
ing to invoke Rule 17.a.ii
– compensate for changes in course or speed required
as a result of being in extremis
4.5 Rule 14 – Head-on
Head-on situations (Figure 8b) provide arguably the
most ambiguous entry criteria of the rules for power-
driven vessels. The definition of “reciprocal or nearly
reciprocal courses” is vague and left to interpretation.
The compass course is required to be used when assess-
ing course difference due to the ship-fixed masthead
light and sidelight definition of ship’s course in Rule 14.
Confusion arises when environmental parameters greatly
affect the course-over-ground; non-visual means (e.g.,
radar, lidar, etc.) measure course-over-ground, so care
must be taken in evaluating contact geometry for proper
entry criteria and resolution of ambiguity. Similarly, a
consistent entry criterion for “nearly reciprocal course”
should be configurable and set in accordance with local
customs, case law, or certifying agency requirements.
Environmental conditions such as sea-state, current, or
fluctuating wind might also warrant a change to the
entry criteria angle (α14
crit) tolerance or use of a filter.
Evaluation scenarios should incorporate sufficient
set and drift to realize an appreciable distance between
course-over-ground and compass heading before certi-
fication as compliant with Rule 14. Small sequential
maneuvers should also be penalized, as a single, readily
apparent maneuver is required (Rule 8). The size of
a readily apparent maneuver is not explicitly defined
in the COLREGS, though turns of 30◦ have been de-
termined by custom to be sufficient [27]. Some texts
suggest a minimum of 35◦ for a sufficient turn [1]. The
intention of the rule is to ensure that turns are apparent
by both radar and visual observation; the single large
16 Kyle Woerner et al.
turn clearly communicates to the other vessel that a risk
of collision has been assumed and the vessel is taking
appropriate early action in accordance with the COL-
REGS. This is especially important for the majority
of collision avoidance encounters that do not involve
explicit communication but rather rely on observation
of the contact’s maneuver alone.
When evaluating maneuvers for a head-on scenario,
both vessels must maneuver to starboard in an appre-
ciable and timely way. Maintaining course or turning
to port should be viewed as a failure to maneuver in
accordance with Rule 14. Rule 14 further specifics that
passing pose must be port-to-port. Pose should therefore
enter into the protocol compliance metric for head-on
encounters. Equation (12) demonstrates an arbitrary
Rule 14 pose function (R14
Θcpa ) accounting for both rela-
tive bearing and contact angle at CPA.
R14
Θcpa = R14
αcpa · R14
βcpa · Rmax (12)
Equation (13) uses specific pose functions for both
contact angle and relative bearing to give large prefer-
ence to near-canonical port aspects. This example pose
function uses combinations of sinusoidal functions of
relative bearing (β) and contact angle (α) at CPA. A
true port-to-port passage will be a relative bearing of
β = 270◦ and a contact angle of α = −90◦ as seen in
Figure 11. Within an allowable tolerance, large devia-
tions from port-to-port passage in open-ocean scenarios
likely indicate insufficient or delayed maneuvers by one
or both vessels. In Figure 11a, a nearly canonical head-
on CPA geometry gives a high pose score. In Figure 11b,
a likely late maneuver by ownship and a subsequent
narrow contact angle at CPA results in a smaller pose
score.
R14
Θcpa =
( sin(αcpa) − 1
2
)2( sin(βcpa) − 1
2
)2
Rmax (13)
Algorithm 14 demonstrates an approach to evaluate
head-on encounters including appropriate penalties for
delayed action (Algorithm 5) and non-apparent turns
(Algorithm 7). Alternative functions to the specific R14
αcpa
and R14
βcpa of Equation (13) are available in the evalu-
ation library discussed in Section 6. Figure 12 shows
an example port-to-port pose function while Figure 13
shows a more severe preference to port angles. Possible
scores range from 0 to the maximum possible protocol
compliance score (Rmax = 100%).
a Near-canonical head-on geometry at CPA.
b Head-on geometry at CPA resulting from delayed
action of ownship (O/S).
Fig. 11. Rule 14 requires head-on contacts to maneuver to
starboard and pass port-to-port. The geometry of a nearly
canonical case (a) shows the preferred CPA geometry including
relative bearing β and contact angle α. Using Equation (13),
a nearly maximum pose score would result. In (b), a delayed
maneuver from ownship (“O/S”) results in a port relative
bearing at CPA; contact angle αcpa, however, accounts for the
less than ideal CPA geometry. Equation (12) would reduce
the overall performance score for the situation in (b).
Algorithm 14 Rule 14: Head-on Vessels
1: procedure Pseudocode for Head-on Vessels
2: Input: αcpa
3: Input: βcpa
4: R14 ← Rmax
5: R14 ← assess non-starboard turn penalty
. “each shall alter her course to starboard”
6: R14 ← assess delayed action penalty
. “made in ample time” (Algorithm 5)
7: R14 ← assess non-apparent turn penalty
. “be large enough to be readily apparent” (Algorithm 7)
. 30◦ to 35◦ (configurable) minimum per case law
. (default linear penalty; configurable)
8: R14 ← assess R14
Θcpa penalty if not port-to-port
. “each shall pass on the port side of the other”
. Equation (12); configurable per library of Section 6.1
9: end procedure
4.6 Rule 15 – Power-driven Crossing
Rule 15 assigns give-way and stand-on responsibilities
to each of two crossing power-driven vessels with a risk
of collision (Figure 8c). The geometric entry criteria are
derived from eliminating head-on and overtaking geome-
tries while retaining a risk of collision. Relative bearing
therefore spans {β : (β < 112.5◦) or (β > 247.5◦)} with
an appropriate contact angle (α) such that a risk of
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 17−150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Angle of Interest φ [deg]
Protocol Score [%]
Example Protocol Function (sin(φ)−1
2 )2
a Example protocol function ( sin(φ)−1
2
)2
b Polar plot of ( sin(φ)−1
2
)2
Fig. 12. The example protocol evaluation function
( sin(φ)−1
2
)2 allows strong reinforcement of port-to-port pas-
sage when substituting both relative bearing and contact angle
for φ as shown in Equation (13). The plot of the Rule 14 cost
function (a) demonstrates high reward for near-port angles.
The polar plot representation (b) demonstrates the same re-
ward function in a top-down view more natural to a collision
avoidance encounter. The radius of the polar plot indicates
the percentage of Rmax; the origin corresponds to zero while
the outer ring corresponds to Rmax = 100%.
collision exists without inducing head-on or overtaking
obligations.
Crossing give-way vessels are specifically required to
not cross ahead of the stand-on vessel; this notion has
been reinforced in admiralty courts [1]. Note that a risk
of collision must exist for Rule 15 to apply. Therefore
a risk of collision invoking crossing give-way actions re-
quires a stern crossing. Verification that a vessel crossed
astern of the stand-on vessel is possible using Θcpa. For
example, a stern crossing will result in a large nega-
tive contact angle at CPA (typically αcpa < −90◦) if
the stand-on contact does not maneuver as shown in
Figure 14. If aggressively regaining course after a stern−150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Angle of Interest φ [deg]
Protocol Score [%]
Example Protocol Function (sin(φ)−1
2 )4
a Example protocol function
( sin(φ)−1
2
)4
b Polar plot of
( sin(φ)−1
2
)4
Fig. 13. A function such as this fourth-order sinusoidal func-
tion allows for more severe penalties than those of Figure 12.
crossing, the give-way vessel may reach CPA at a large
positive value of contact angle (e.g., α > 165◦) though
this would be an exception to the norm. If the stand-on
vessel determines that an in extremis situation exists
and maneuvers to starboard, the give-way vessel should
similarly be penalized for failure to act in accordance
with the COLREGS.
A general approach to evaluating a crossing give-way
power-driven vessel under Rule 15 can be seen in Algo-
rithms 4 and 15 and includes the following attributes:
– penalize crossing ahead (e.g., −80◦ < αcpa < 165◦
(configurable) where αcpa is the stand-on vessel’s
contact angle if no action is taken under Rule 17.a.ii)
– penalize forcing an in extremis maneuver by the
stand-on vessel in accordance with Rule 17.a.ii
– penalize give-way requirements of Rule 16 (Section 4.2)
– include safety penalty for early and substantial ac-
tion clause of Rule 16
18 Kyle Woerner et al.
a Initial Crossing Geometry b Slowed Give-way
c Stern-pointing Give-way d Stern-crossing Give-way
Fig. 14. Crossing astern is required of a crossing give-way
vessel with a risk of collision [1]. For an initial Rule 15 crossing
scenario (a), a give-way contact might slow considerably (b)
resulting in a contact angle at CPA near αcpa = −90◦. In
(c), the give-way contact has maneuvered to starboard and
maintained speed likely resulting in a contact angle at CPA
near αcpa = −135◦. In (d), the give-way contact has turned
and is about to cross the stern of the stand-on vessel. Because
of the forward velocity of the stand-on vessel, CPA has likely
already occurred near a contact angle αcpa = −165◦.
Requirements of the stand-on vessel in a power-driven
crossing situation are discussed in Section 4.3 and Algo-
rithm 9.
Algorithm 15 Rule 15: Power-driven Crossing
1: procedure Pseudocode for Power-driven Crossing
Vessels
2: if crossing give-way vessel then
3: R15/16 ← R16 . (Algorithm 4)
. crossing give-way vessel must obey Rule 16
4: R15/16 ← assess pass-ahead penalty
. penalize for crossing bow of contact
. “avoid crossing ahead of the other vessel”
. see case law [1, 4, 25]
5: else if crossing stand-on vessel then
6: R15/17 ← R17 . (Algorithm 9)
. “crossing stand-on vessel must obey Rule 17”
7: end if
8: end procedure
5 Discussion of COLREGS Rules Requiring
Further Development of Evaluation Algorithms
While Section 4 presented algorithms for initial eval-
uation of Rules 13-17, this section presents narratives
of other rules within the protocol that require future
development. Section 5.1 presents amplification of meth-
ods for Category VI of Table 1. Section 5.2 presents
Category I considerations, Section 5.3 presents Cate-
gory II, Section 5.4 presents Category IV, Section 5.5
presents Category VI, Section 5.6 presents Category X,
and Section 5.7 presents Category IX all of Table 1.
5.1 Responsibilities of Vessels within Sight: Rules 11, 18
Identification of the contact’s type (e.g., power-driven,
sailing, etc.) gives necessary knowledge for determining
precedence under Rule 18. Certain vessels yield right-of-
way to others by the nature of their vessel type; similarly,
other vessels expect and are afforded right-of-way. To
be compliant with Rule 18, autonomous vessels must
be able to correctly classify vessel types and properly
assign give-way hierarchy.
Detection of another vessel being under sail is in-
sufficient for some scenarios involving multiple sailing
craft in the vicinity of a power-driven autonomous ves-
sel. In order to anticipate the likely movements of a
sailing give-way to avoid a sailing stand-on, each au-
tonomous vessel should be able to identify which sailing
vessel is stand-on and which is give-way to the other. By
determining environmental conditions such as wind, a
power-driven autonomous vessel can anticipate a likely
maneuver of a sailing give-way vessel that might in-
terfere with ownship’s intentions to give-way to both
sailing vessels.
5.2 General Rules (Rules 1-3)
Much debate exists as to whether an autonomous vessel
without a human physically present constitutes a “vessel”
under international law. This paper assumes that the
definition accorded in Rules 1-3 apply equally to any
floating structure (or “watercraft”) as if a human were
physically present and operating it. Rule 3 defines the
scope of COLREGS to include any “vessel” without
specification of control, be it human, machine, or some
combination thereof. The only distinctions drawn by the
COLREGS are related to propulsion (e.g., sail, power-
driven, etc.) and maneuverability (e.g., fishing, not under
command, etc.) constraints. This is consistent with case
law dating back to the 19th century [9, 29, 32]. As
recently as 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court rejected a
permanently moored house boat meeting the definition
of a vessel. In doing so, the court affirmed that the
definition of a vessel is met if a reasonable observer
would consider it designed to a practical degree for
carrying people or things over water citing the house
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 19
boat’s absence of a rudder or steering mechanism as
well as a lack of capacity to generate or store electricity
[30].
Accordingly, COLREGS must apply to autonomous
vessels as though they were human controlled and per-
forming the same tasks. Rule 3 further stipulates that
“Vessels shall be deemed to be in sight of one another
only when one can be observed visually from the other.”
Various work to emulate a human lookout by use of
on-board sensors and sensor processing enables “sight,”
including cameras, infra-red sensors, and other simi-
lar technologies. The COLREGS deliberately address
a visual requirement when two vessels are in “sight”
of each other, though this does not exclude non-sight
sensors (e.g., radar, lidar, sonar) from assisting with ini-
tial detection, classification, or queuing of sight sensors.
Similarly, the “restricted visibility” definition of Rule 3
must consider the limitations of human-operated vessels
especially as it relates to the human-visible spectrum
of light; the inherent safety implications of entering a
restricted visibility constraint even if an autonomous
vessel’s sensors allow greater detection range than that
of a human operator must be considered.
The intention of the restricted visibility sections of
COLREGS are two-fold:
1. increase detectability to other contacts to maximize
detection range
2. reduce allowable speed while further limiting maneu-
ver directions to account for and partially mitigate
limited detection distances
Autonomous designers require clarification from the
international governing bodies as to what officially con-
stitutes “sight” of a non-human controlled vessel.
5.3 General Conduct of Vessels and Special Traffic
Schemes (Rules 4-10)
Rules 4-10 address the requirements of all vessels in-
cluding the stationing of a look-out, use of safe speed,
determining risk of collision, the action required to avoid
collision, behavior in narrow channels, and behavior in
traffic separation schemes [26]. One point of contention
is the requirements of Rule 5 to maintain a look-out.
Several boards have been formed in the international
community to address the perceived discrepancy in what,
if any, non-human means may constitute a look-out in
accordance with the COLREGS. This paper assumes
that any means of “sight and hearing” whether human
or machine may constitute a look-out so long as it suf-
ficiently functions within the spirit of the COLREGS
and to the standards of a qualified human lookout.
5.3.1 Rule 5 – Lookout
Rule 5 requires a look-out to be stationed “by sight and
hearing as well as by all available means appropriate in
the prevailing circumstances.” Evaluation should pre-
fer coordination between sight and hearing algorithms
consistent with a reasonably trained human look-out.
Metrics for Rule 5 under the assumption of machine-
based lookout include:
– listening with on-board auditory sensors at all times
while underway. Above-waterline sensors must al-
ways be functional. Sonar may supplement if in-
stalled but must never replace a surface vessel’s
above-waterline auditory sensor requirement
– observing with a sufficient combination of on-board
non-auditory (visual, radar, lidar, infrared, etc.) sen-
sors at all times when underway
– conditionally supplementing with additional on-board
sensors (e.g., radar), off-board sensors (e.g., accom-
panying aerial vehicle), and externally provided data
(e.g., AIS) as necessary
5.3.2 Rule 6 – Safe Speed
Environmental factors and ship dynamics predominantly
enter with Rule 6. Rule 6 specifically identifies 12 ar-
eas – assuming that the autonomous vessel has radar
– requiring evaluation when determining a safe speed.
The state of visibility, contact density, stopping distance,
turning ability, sea state, and draft are just some of the
parameters identified when determining a safe speed.
Autonomous vessels must be able to independently de-
termine their effective time-distance capabilities, turning
kinematics and dynamics, and effects of contact density
when selecting a maximum allowable speed to be fully
compliant with Rule 6.
5.3.3 Rule 7 – Risk of Collision
As in human-operated ship driving, autonomous marine
vehicles enjoy widely varying interpretation of what a
“risk of collision” means based on operating style and
design. Several factors allow mariners to make assump-
tions about the other vessel’s level of tolerance when
assessing a risk of collision including vessel type, cargo,
primary mission, maneuverability, and pose. For exam-
ple, merchant vessels often have similar desired ranges
at CPA based on common training, similar ship ma-
neuverability characteristics, and maritime customs. A
liquid Nitrogen gas tanker might have a tendency for
larger, more conservative ranges at CPA than say a
transiting fishing trawler who is more accustomed to
20 Kyle Woerner et al.
high contact density environments with greater maneu-
verability. Pose becomes a highly relevant consideration
for determination of collision risk. Both pose at CPA
and initial pose must be considered in conjunction with
speed and range when assessing risk of collision.
Another consideration is the underlying flexibility
of the collision avoidance algorithms. Human operators
often use multiple CPA range thresholds to determine
risk of collision and necessary actions. To determine risk
of collision, one must know the conditions present in
the decision space of the vessel as well as the vessel’s
current capabilities. For example, certain crew members
offer greater levels of experience, while certain machin-
ery conditions or watch-stander configurations allow
for greater maneuverability or performance. Requiring
the vessel’s Captain or additional watch officers on the
bridge for certain encounter scenarios is one example of
a modified watch-stander configuration [28]. These fac-
tors directly contribute to the level of conservativeness
of the subsequent maneuver.
A vessel master’s policy often dictates that certain
precautionary measures must be in place before taking
contacts closer than certain ranges [27, 28]. This might
include certain qualified watch-standers present on the
bridge, certain machinery configurations, or certain envi-
ronmental conditions. Similarly, restricted visibility and
other detectability considerations must be considered in
the determination of risk of collision.
Two considerations are specifically required as com-
ponents of determination of collision risk, namely, 1) con-
tacts with constant compass bearing with corresponding
decreasing range, and 2) approaching large vessels, tows,
or close range contacts. If either of these two areas are
not explicitly considered in risk determination, an im-
mediate failure score is warranted for Rule 7. Additional
metrics should include the appropriate configuration of
range thresholds, the tolerance for determining a con-
stant bearing/decreasing range scenario, early warning
capabilities, and analysis of “scanty information”. Such
scanty information [26] might be considered with appro-
priate weight based on radar return strength, fusion of
other sensor data, and sensor filter settings.
5.3.4 Traffic Separation Schemes (Rule 10)
Traffic separation schemes comprise a special subset of
vessel interactions similar to those of driving on a high-
way with a car. The most prominent solution to driving
in this scheme is [21]. Development of an evaluation
algorithm for protocol compliance using only track data
in future work would be well served to consider the
approaches of algorithms such as this.
5.4 Sailing in Sight of Another Sailing Vessel (Rule 12)
Sailing vessels must be properly identified in order to
discriminate precedence per Rule 18 and, in the case of
ownship also being a sailing vessel, determine stand-on
and give-way status per Rule 12. In the case of both
vessels being under sail, proper identification of the
windward side of both vessels is required (both wind
direction as well as the location of the mainsail or the
largest fore-and-aft sail). Failure to properly identify
other sailing vessels must result in a failure of Rule 12.
Further evaluation using the requirements of Rules 16
and 17 applies as appropriate.
5.5 Restricted Visibility (Rule 19)
In addition to the discussion of Section 5.2, Rule 19 ad-
dresses situations of reduced visibility, i.e., when vessels
cannot see the other due to the environmental reasons
prescribed in Rule 3. Specific checks should be made
during algorithm testing to ensure restrictions are in
place to limit speed consistent with Rules 6 and 19.
The two specific cases addressed in Rule 19.d should
be explicitly tested in conditions emulating restricted
visibility, including:
– ensuring a vessel does not alter course to port for
a vessel forward of the beam, except in cases of
overtaking
– ensuring a vessel does not alter course toward a
vessel abeam or abaft the beam
Testing should also consider the cases of auditory detec-
tion of fog signals ahead of the beam to ensure invocation
of the bare-steerage clause of Rule 19.e.
5.6 Lights and Shapes (Rules 20-31)
There are two main areas of scope in the lights and
shapes section of the COLREGS. First, designers must
properly display the required lights and shapes on own-
ship according to certain ship characteristics. This re-
quires self-awareness of whether a particular section of
the COLREGS which requires special lights and shapes
applies. In addition, the ability to actually transmit
the appropriate signal for the correct duration of time
is required. Second, a vehicle must be able to prop-
erly identify lights and shapes of other vessels including
assignment of proper meaning. This recognition and
application to the contact directly complements Rule 18
requirements of precedence with respect to ownship’s
collision avoidance role viz stand-on or give-way. Special
lights and shapes may be necessary for autonomously
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 21
operated vessels to display. The community would be
well served by international governing bodies issuing
guidance stating whether a special day shape or light
signal is required to identify autonomously operated ve-
hicles, and if so, making such display or signal standard
across the world5.
5.7 Sound and Light Signals (Rules 32-37)
Quite similarly to the lights and shapes requirements of
Section 5.6, vessels must be able to properly communi-
cate using sound and light signals in accordance with
the COLREGS. Autonomous vessels are in need of clari-
fication of any special sound or light signals required for
autonomous vessels. To avoid ad hoc signals intended
to indicate an autonomous vessel encountering a human
vessel, international governing bodies should provide
articulated guidance. Advances in the field within the
scope of this section would focus on multiple areas in-
cluding:
– receiving a contact’s light and sound signals
– interpreting these light and sound signals then in-
fluencing ownship’s autonomous collision avoidance
behaviors appropriately
– transmitting light and sound signals to a contact
when ownship autonomously determines necessity in
accordance with the COLREGS
6 COLREGS Testing and Evaluation
A COLREGS testing and evaluation software program
was designed to be used from a third party neutral
“shoreside” observer with assumed perfect sensing data
of the vessels under observation in [31]. The purpose
of the testing and evaluation program is to act as a
neutral grader of a ship’s performance in complying
with the COLREGS, especially in the absence of human
intervention. Third party perfect sensing represents a
reasonable assumption for a road test or other evaluator
entity, as the vessel autonomy could be evaluated in a
well-sensored testing range with verified GPS-based lo-
cation data recorded for all vessels. A position reporting
protocol such as AIS may prove satisfactory if reports
can be deemed trustworthy.
Future work could incorporate sensor fusion and im-
perfect sensing scenarios that would enable this concept
to be used outside the realm of certification-focused test-
ing and evaluation. Scope of the testing and evaluation
5 Submarines operating on the surface are currently the
only special signal not contained as a requirement within the
numbered international rules.
Fig. 15. COLREGS evaluation will be capable of evaluating
complex scenarios such as this non-canonical geometry, multi-
rule encounter. Note that multiple collision avoidance rules
exist simultaneously between these power-driven vessels.
program was limited to power-driven vessel rules, specif-
ically Rules 13-18. A library was developed to allow for
both real-time (Section 6.3) and post-mission analysis
(Section 6.4). Complex multi-vehicle encounters such as
the one shown in Figure 15 are capable of real-time or
post-mission analysis.
The testing and evaluation program for a multi-
contact power-driven scenario includes the ability to:
– identify that the geometry of two vehicles requires
action per the COLREGS
– identify the specific rules assigned to each vessel
– quantify the actions of each vessel with respect to
the identified rules
– generate a report of each vessel’s actions at the
conclusion of the encounter
– populate a scoring system for each vehicle and a
cumulative performance assessment based on various
scenarios and interactions over a specified duration
– provide quantified data to support determination
of a vessel’s scope of COLREGS compliance after
performing specified encounters. Sufficient interac-
tions in various multi-vessel, multi-rule scenarios are
necessary as part of the “road test” described in
Section 6.5 and presented in [33].
Multi-contact scenarios often involve sets of rules
that require differing action. Priority must be assigned
as to what action should be taken given the larger scope
of the navigation and collision avoidance pictures. Eval-
uation algorithms must account for the requirements of
individual rules while also considering the larger contact
picture and more overarching rules of the protocol.
22 Kyle Woerner et al.
6.1 Library
The protocol-constrained collision avoidance evaluation
library allows a common repository for evaluation algo-
rithms. The library enables expansion of functionality
to multiple programs using a common set of algorithms
while maintaining standardized configuration of collision
avoidance parameters and adaptability to other protocol
rule sets. This allows real-time and post-mission anal-
ysis programs to use equivalent means of evaluation;
however, it also allows post-mission evaluation using
different penalty functions or configuration settings ac-
cording to the evaluator’s preference. The library of
algorithms allows configuration parameters to properly
tune weights and metrics to local customs or require-
ments of certification authorities.
Users may use Equations (14)-(17) as an initial li-
brary to construct relevant evaluation functions based on
pose angles. The input angle φ may be configured to use
the contact angle α or relative bearing β. A steering an-
gle φ0 allows tailorable directionality for alternative use
of the same functions. An alternative use case might rep-
resent a passing arrangement agreed via bridge-to-bridge
radio, such as a rare and non-conforming starboard-to-
starboard passage. Linear and quadratic functions of
range and speed are also available within the initial eval-
uation library release. Incorporation of other functions
and input parameters is reserved for future work. These
functions are introduced to promote continued dialogue
of alternative evaluation functions and approaches, in-
cluding those rules whose evaluation algorithms have
yet to be fully developed.
sin2(φ + φ0) (14)
step(φ) − step(φ0) (15)
( sin(φ+φ0)−1
2
)2
(16)
( sin(φ+φ0)−1
2
)4
(17)
6.2 Configurability of Programs
The evaluation programs are configurable for several pa-
rameters of interest to a designer or evaluator including:
– preferred range at CPA
– minimum acceptable range at CPA
– range at which a near-miss occurs
– range at which a collision is assumed
– threshold COLREGS rule compliance score below
which instantaneous reports should be made
– threshold safety score below which instantaneous
reports should be made
– vessel types to consider (allows knowledge of aerial,
ground, and undersea vehicles without interference
of collision avoidance evaluation)
– range at which contact detection likely occurs
– maximum time threshold allowed for comparison of
a contact’s position report and ownship’s position
report
– display of visual indicators when configuration ranges
or minimum rule compliance scores are violated
– sounding of audible alerts when configuration ranges
or minimum rule compliance scores are violated
6.3 Real-time Analysis
Using the protocol library for COLREGS presented in
this paper, a real-time collision avoidance evaluation
program gives instantaneous feedback to vessel designers
and a means of real-time evaluation to any certification
entity. This can be used to assign penalties or warnings
to vessels violating the COLREGS, especially but not
limited to training and design verification scenarios.
Notifications can be sent to vessels in the vicinity of
non-compliant actors to allow increased caution while
operating. Reports of egregious actions can be passed
to designers, insurance agencies, or enforcement entities
as appropriate or required by statute.
Within the scope of the current work, the real-time
protocol evaluation tool was used to display important
information at the shoreside observation center includ-
ing:
– COLREGS compliance scores for power-driven rules
– safety scores after an encounter
– rules required as determined by the observer
– range at CPA
– time of CPA
– vessel names and types
A real-time text report is posted to the mission
console including summaries of overall performance
(e.g., safety, protocol compliance, type of interaction)
as shown in Figure 16. To assist a shoreside observer
with several vehicles underway, a series of visual and au-
dible indicators were incorporated to provide real-time
warning of dangerous or inappropriate action. Colored
range rings (Figure 17) appeared whenever violations
occurred including:
– green - rcpa less than minimum acceptable CPA
range
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 23
Fig. 16. Scoring of COLREGS collision avoidance rules allow
for real-time evaluation of vehicle performance at the shoreside
observation center. Configurable range parameters include
nominal detection range, preferred range at CPA, minimum
acceptable range at CPA, threshold range at which a near-
miss occurs, and the range at which a collision is assumed.
An aggregate tally of COLREGS violations (scores below a
configurable threshold value) and of each configuration range
are displayed. Vehicle types as specified by each vessel are
used as a filter to allow consideration of only certain entities
within the “visibility” of the shoreside observation center. This
allows underwater and aerial vehicles to share the shoreside
observation display without unnecessarily being considered as
COLREGS compliance candidates.
– yellow - rcpa less than near-miss range
– red - rcpa less than collision range
– blue - COLREGS score less than the threshold value
6.4 Post-mission Analysis
A post-mission analysis tool was constructed to provide
detailed insight into collision avoidance performance of
vessels. The post-mission analysis requires only vehicle
position logs; the real-time assessment program was not
required to be running to conduct post-mission analysis.
A report is generated for each run of the post-mission
analysis tool with a configurable scale of verbosity. In
more verbose modes, detailed explanations of cause for
score deduction allows designers and operators to un-
derstand the rationale for evaluation scores. This can
be used to provide feedback and tune future actions. In
addition to the verbosity option, all configuration pa-
rameters of Section 6.1 are available in the post-mission
analysis tool. Evaluation data are exported to a comma-
separated value report for ease of meta analysis in a
user’s favorite data analysis program. This data can
then be used for performance analysis by vehicle, by
rule combination, or by other parameters of interest to
the evaluator.
a Min-desired range viola-
tion
b Near-miss range violation
c Collision range violation d COLREGS violation
Fig. 17. Violations of range below configurable threshold
values resulted in displaying range rings including: (a) green
for violating minimum desired range, (b) yellow for violating
near-miss range, and (c) red for violating the collision range.
Violations of COLREGS collision avoidance rules below a
configurable threshold value result in display of a blue ring
(d) around the vehicle. Sounding of an optional audible indi-
cator was also possible for each violation. This COLREGS
evaluation system allows real-time warning to an evaluator
that a dangerous collision situation or egregious violation of
the rules is occurring.
6.5 Informing the COLREGS Certification Road Test
In order to certify autonomous collision avoidance algo-
rithms for on-water use outside of a testing environment,
a road test comprised of a comprehensive scope of ex-
amination and quantifiable metrics of performance was
described in [33]. To be compliant with the appropriate
protocol rule set of COLREGS, a satisfactory level of
performance must be met across each category of evalua-
tion. The categories of Section 2 comprise the evaluation
areas for this test and are the principal means for the
road test of [33] to be performed. Differing degrees of
road tests may be possible for various levels of certifica-
tion for operation.
7 Conclusion
This paper defined metrics and algorithms to quantify
protocol compliance and safety for autonomous colli-
sion avoidance. A library of functions was proposed
24 Kyle Woerner et al.
to allow configuration of the protocol evaluation tools
in both real-time and post-mission analysis. Specific
instantiation of protocol quantification and evaluation
was demonstrated for the rules of the road for sea-going
vessels, i.e., COLREGS.
Real-time on-vehicle instantiations of the COLREGS
evaluation program in this paper are possible to detect
non-compliance of other vessels and adjust collision
avoidance parameters accordingly. Future work will al-
low a vessel to detect vessels with compliance scores less
than a threshold value and choose to maneuver sooner
than normal or seek a more conservative range or pose
at CPA.
Future work will enable third-party evaluation of
the full rule sets rather than limitation to power-driven
vessels. Further work is required to more fully model
contact-free intentions when maintaining course and
speed of a stand-on vessel in complex scenarios such
as slowing to pick up a pilot. Further discussion and
research is needed to fully incorporate local customs and
laws within COLREGS (including U.S. Inland Rules),
alternative protocols such as Rules of the Air, and special
arrangements such as those made by bridge-to-bridge
radio. Alternative approaches to evaluating pose may
show cases where safety functions are more limited at
times other than the closest point of approach.
Before integrating human controlled and autonomous
systems outside of laboratory environments, the com-
mon practices, customs, and interpretations of the COL-
REGS by manned operators must be fully understood.
Autonomous designs that incorporate expectations and
norms of human operators will achieve solutions that
more naturally integrate autonomous and human-operated
vessels. The categorization of scope and the incorpora-
tion of the nuance, applicable case law, and customs re-
lated to COLREGS allows appropriate and quantifiable
assessment of autonomous collision avoidance perfor-
mance. The International Maritime Organization, and
other governing bodies, may choose to include these
metrics as a means to inform both regulation and policy
in maritime collision avoidance protocols.
7.1 Abbreviations and Acronyms
α - contact angle
α0 - contact angle at detection
αcpa - contact angle at CPA
αc - cutoff contact angle to define reward functions
αcrit - critical cutoff angle for entry criteria
β - relative bearing
β0 - relative bearing at detection
βcpa - relative bearing at CPA
βc - cutoff rel. bearing to define reward functions
φ - arbitrary angle for generic functions
φ0 - arbitrary steering angle for generic functions
CPA - closest point of approach; point of min. range
r - current range to contact
rcpa - predicted or actual CPA range (distance)
rdetect - range at which a contact is detected
reff - effective range after adding pose component
rmaneuver - range at which vessel maneuvers
Rcol - range that assumes physical collision
Rdetect - assumed range of contact detection
Rmin - minimum acceptable CPA range
Rnm - range considered a near-miss encounter
Rpref - preferred CPA range
R - COLREGS rule compliance function
Rmax - max possible COLREGS compliance score
RΘ - pose component of COLREGS compliance
S - safety function for an encounter
Sr - range component of safety function
SΘ - pose component of safety function
Smax
Θ - maximum possible pose score
tcpa - time of CPA
tmaneuver - time of maneuver
θ - candidate or actual course (θ ∈ [0, 360◦))
|∆θ| - absolute change in course
∆θapp - apparent course deviation threshold
∆θmd - minimum detectable course deviation
Θ - pose consisting of 〈α, β〉
Θo - initial relative pose (determines rule set)
Θcpa - relative pose at CPA (measure of safety)
v - speed
v0 - initial speed at time of detection
∆v - change in speed during maneuver
∆vapp - apparent speed reduction threshold
∆vslow - slow down of vessel during maneuver
∆vfast - speed up of vessel during maneuver
∆vmax - greater of absolute speed up or slow down
∆vmd - minimum detectable speed change
180◦
- angle converted to [−180◦, 180◦)
360◦
- angle converted to [0, 360◦)
References
1. Allen, C.: Farwell’s Rules of the Nautical Road. Blue
and gold professional library series. Naval Institute Press
(2005)
2. Benjamin, M.R., Leonard, J.J., Curcio, J.A., Newman,
P.M.: A Method for Protocol-based Collision Avoidance
Between Autonomous Marine Surface Craft. Journal of
Field Robotics 23(5), 333 – 346 (2006)
3. Campbell, S., Abu-Tair, M., Naeem, W.: An automatic
colregs-compliant obstacle avoidance system for an un-
manned surface vehicle. Proceedings of the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, Part M: Journal of Engineering for
the Maritime Environment p. 1475090213498229 (2013)
Quantifying Protocol Evaluation for Autonomous Collision Avoidance 25
4. Cockcroft, A.N., Lameijer, J.N.F.: Guide to the Collision
Avoidance Rules. Butterworth-Heinemann (2012)
5. Commonwealth of Massachusetts: Right-of-way at Inter-
secting Ways; Turning on Red Signals, Part 1 Title XIV
Chapter 89 Section 8 edn.
6. Fisher, M.: Evaluation of The Vertical Sector Light Re-
quirements for Unmanned Barges; Final Rept. Tech. rep.,
US Coast Guard (1991)
7. Goerlandt, F., Kujala, P., 2014. On the reliability and va-
lidity of ship-ship collision risk analysis in light of different
perspectives on risk Safety Science 62, 348-365.
8. Goerlandt, F., Montewka, J., Kuzmin, V., Kujala, P., 2015.
A risk-informed ship collision alert system: framework and
application Safety Science. 77, 182-204.
9. Henderson, A.: Murky Waters: The Legal Status of Un-
manned Undersea Vehicles. Naval Law Review pp. 55–72
(2006)
10. International Civil Aviation Organization: Rules of the
Air. Convention on International Civil Aviation (2005)
11. Kuwata, Y., Wolf, M., Zarzhitsky, D., Huntsberger,
T.: Safe Maritime Autonomous Navigation With COL-
REGS, Using Velocity Obstacles. Oceanic Engineer-
ing, IEEE Journal of 39(1), 110–119 (2014). DOI
10.1109/JOE.2013.2254214
12. Kuwata, Y., Wolf, M.T., Zarzhitsky, D., Huntsberger,
T.L.: Safe Maritime Navigation with COLREGS Using
Velocity Obstacles. IEEE Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems pp. 4728–4734 (2011)
13. H.-J. Lee and K. P. Rhee. Development of Collision Avoid-
ance System by Using Expert System and Search Algo-
rithm. International Shipbuilding Progress 48.3 (2001),
pp. 197212.
14. Y.-i. Lee and Y.-G. Kim. A Collision Avoidance System for
Autonomous Ship Using Fuzzy Relational Products and
COLREGs. Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated
Learning. Springer, 2004, pp. 247252.
15. Lopez-Santander, A., Lawry, J. 2017. An Ordinal Model
of Risk Based on Mariner’s Judgement. Journal of Navi-
gation. 70(2), 309-324.
16. Perera, L.P., Guedes Soares, C., 2015. Collision risk detec-
tion and quantification in ship navigation with integrated
bridge systems. Ocean Engineering. 109, 344-354.
17. Shah, B.C.: Trajectory Planning with Adaptive Control
Primitives for Autonomous Surface Vehicles Operating in
Congested Civilian Traffic. IEEE International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (2014)
18. ˇSvec, P., Shah, B., Bertaska, I., Alvarez, J., Sinisterra, A.,
von Ellenrieder, K., Dhanak, M., Gupta, S.: Dynamics-
Aware Target Following for An Autonomous Surface Vehi-
cle Operating Under COLREGs In Civilian Traffic. In: In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
pp. 3871–3878 (2013). DOI 10.1109/IROS.2013.6696910
19. Szlapczynski, R.: Evolutionary Planning of Safe Ship
Tracks in Restricted Visibility. Journal of Navigation 68,
39–51 (2015). DOI 10.1017/S0373463314000587
20. Szlapczynski, R., Szlapczynska, J.: Colregs compliance in
evolutionary sets of cooperating ship trajectories. Elec-
tronic journal of international group on reliability, Relia-
bility: Theory and Applications 2(1), 127–137 (2011)
21. Szlapczynski Rafalapczy´nski, R.: Evolutionary Sets of
Safe Ship Trajectories Within Traffic Separation Schemes
Journal of Navigation (2013)
22. Szlapczynski, R., Szlapczynska, J., 2016. An analysis of
domain-based ship collision risk parameters. Ocean Eng.
126, 47-56.
23. Tam, C., Bucknall, R.: Collision Risk Assessment for Ships.
Journal of Marine Science and Technology 15(3), 257–270
(2010)
24. Tam, C., Bucknall, R.: Path-planning algorithm for ships
in close-range encounters. Journal of marine science and
technology 15(4), 395–407 (2010)
25. Thomas, D.: The Fatal Flaw: Collision at Sea and the
Failure of the Rules. Phaiacia, Carmarthenshire, United
Kingdom (2001)
26. United States Coast Guard: Navigation Rules,
International-Inland. 1977-19. United States Department
of Transportation (1999)
27. United States Coast Guard: Standing Orders for The Offi-
cers of The Deck (Freedom of Information Act). USCGC
HEALY Instruction M1603.1C (2006)
28. United States Navy: Standing Orders for USS Greeneville
(Freedom of Information Act). USS Greeneville Instruc-
tion C3120.25 (1999)
29. U.S. Supreme Court: Stewart v. Dutra Construction Co.
543 U.S. 481 (2005)
30. U.S. Supreme Court: Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach,
Fla. (2013)
31. Woerner, K.: Multi-Contact Protocol-Constrained Colli-
sion Avoidance for Autonomous Marine Vehicles. Ph.D.
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2016)
32. Woerner, K.L.: COLREGS-Compliant Autonomous Colli-
sion Avoidance Using Multi-Objective Optimization with
Interval Programming. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cam-
bridge, MA 02139 (2014)
33. Woerner, K.L., Benjamin, M.R., Novitzky, M., Leonard,
J.J.: Collision Avoidance Road Test for COLREGS-
Constrained Autonomous Vehicles. In: OCEANS 2016
MTS/IEEE Monterey (2016)
34. Zhang, J., Zhang, D., Yan, X., Haugen, S., Guedes Soares,
C., 2015. A distributed anti-collision decision support for-
mulation in multi-ship encounter situations under COL-
REGs. Ocean Engineering. 105, 336-348.
35. Zhao, J.: The Legal Interpretation of Keeping Course and
Speed. Journal of Maritime Law & Commerce 41, 85
(2010)